#des_implementation
This is my repository for my DES implementation in C++. The main function for my program is fairly simple. It takes the name of the input and output files as command line arguments. It then opens both files, reads the input 1 byte at a time, encrypts each byte, and puts the encrypted byte in the output file. There may be some characters that don't appear in text editors due to being encrypted as bytes matching ASCII control characters. The key is also set in the main function and later passed into the encrypt function. The encrypt function makes use of several arrays that represent the permutations used  in the encryption. The permute function takes the bits to be permuted, the aforementioned permutation arrays, the length of the permutation array, and the number of bits being passed in. The permute function is simple beyond that. The permutation function also doubles as the expansion function, as it can add a bit to the returned permutation multiple times.  The permutation function is also used to get the outer bits and inner bits that are utilized in the S-table look-ups. The leftShiftKey function implements circular left shift functionality. The bitmask is necessary as bits in C++ don’t fall off after 5 bits. Bitmasks and right shifts are also used multiple times to separate bits into left and right sections. 

Walking through the encrypt program, we first initialize several permutation arrays given in the slides. We then do the initial permutation and separate the permuted plaintext into left and right sections. The key undergoes the P10 permutation, is leftshifted, and is then passed into the permute function for the P8 permutation. The returned permutation is passed into the ffunction function. The ffunction function expands the right bits passed in, XORs the result with the key, splits the result into left and right bits again, then uses the permute function several times to get the bits for the S-table look-ups. The return value from the ffunction is the XOR’ed with the left section of the permuted plaintext, the new left and original right are then swapped, then the process is repeated for the post swap left and right. 
The encryption assumes most significant bit is the leftmost bit, as this is what is used for the C++ bitset. Using the bitset from the std greatly simplifies finding specific bits from a given number, as bits are indexed in a bitset. 

I chose not to implement any functionality in sending files. This could be simply done in another program, or my program could be modified to send over a socket connection. Modifying my program would mostly entail placing my encrypted bytes into a buffer and sending the buffer when it reaches capacity. 

Unsurprisingly, my encryption is very weak compared to a proper DES encryption when it comes to encrypting a message in plain English. By encrypting byte-by-byte, my program is effectively a slightly complicated replacement process, where instead of replacing each character with another English character it replaces it with a 32-bit integer. 

Decryption is possible by adding the optional 3rd command line arguement "-d"